.\" $Backplane: rdbms/man1/ddump.1,v 1.1 2002/03/19 05:43:15 dillon Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 18, 2002
.Dt DDUMP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ddump
.Nd dump contents of database as SQL
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op @timestamp
.Op Fl ansdq
.Op Fl T Ar tsfile
.Op Fl D Ar dbdir
.Op Fl q
.Op Fl GMT
.Ar database[:schema.table]
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
.Nm
generates SQL statements to the standard output representing a
snapshot of the entire contents of the specified database or
the contents of a specific table.  By default the most recent
synchronization point is used for the snapshot.
.Nm
uses streaming queries and can dump databases of any size without
incuring any significant memory overhead.  Since the database uses
a historical storage format, the snapshot incurs no additional
overhead (and, in fact, all transactions are snapshots by default).
.Pp
The output of
.Nm
can be used to load a fresh, empty database by piping its output into
.Nm rsql
or
.Nm dsql .
Beyond that, there is no specific table or record order for the output.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It @timestamp
Dump a snapshot of the database as it appeared at particular date and
time.  If not specified the most recent synchronization point is used.
Timestamps may be in one of three formats:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It 0xHEX
A 64 bit 'raw' database timestamp value.  Database timestamps are
essentially in UNIX time_t format scaled by microseconds.
.It yyyy.mm.dd.hh.mm.ss.frac[G]
For example, 2002.03.22.12.00.00.0G.  All fields are optional.  A 'G'
suffix indicates that you are specifying the time in GMT units, otherwise
the time is specified using your local time zone.
.It ddmmmyyyy/hh:mm:ss.frac[G]
For example, 23May2002.  The day and month is required, the year is optional,
and the elements in the daytime are optional.  A 'G' suffix indicates
that you are specifying the time in GMT units, otherwise the time
is specified using your local time zone.
.El
.It Fl a
Include system tables in the dump.  Normally
.Nm
comments out system tables in the dump, since they are mostly synthesized
as side effects to the other SQL statements in the dump.
.It Fl n
Do not generate BEGIN/COMMIT sequences in the dump.  Normally
.Nm
generates BEGIN and COMMIT statements after each table create
and for each block of 100 inserts to facilitate loading into a new
database.
.It Fl s
Only dump the schema.  Do not dump table contents.  Normally
.Nm
dumps both the schema (e.g. as in CREATE TABLE ...) and the
INSERTs representing the contents of the tables.
.It Fl d
Gegnerate a DROP TABLE statement prior to CREATE TABLE.  This
option facilitates testing by allowing you to reload an existing
database from scratch without having to destroy and recreate it.
.It Fl q
Tell
.Nm
to be less verbose on stderr.
.It Fl T Ar tsfile
Enforce transactional coherency between separate executions of
.Nm
and other programs supporting this option.  By default
.Nm
chooses the latest synchronization point but synchronization lags
behind the COMMIT so running SQL queries in separate invocations
of program binaries from a script do not necessarily guarentee
that each invocation will be transactionally coherent with the
prior invocation. 
.Ar tsfile
holds the timestamp representing the most recent commit.  If the
file exists,
.Nm
will use this timestamp as the freeze point for the transaction,
forcing it to be coherent.  The timestamp in the file will be updated
to the latest commit timestamp when the program exits.  If the file does 
not exist the latest synchronization point is used and the file is
created on exit.
.It Fl D Ar dbdir
If specified,
.Ar dbdir
is used as the RDBMS directory instead of the contents of the
RDBMS_DIR environment variable.  This directory must be the
base directory used by the replicator running on the current host
and serves as a rendezvous point so the program can access the
database.
.It Fl GMT
Generating an ascii representation of timestamps in GMT.  If not
specified timestamps are output using your local time zone.
.It Ar database[:schema.table]
Specify the database to dump.  You may also optionally specify a
specific table to dump.
.El
.Pp
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ddump 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
command first appeared in version 1.0
